---
year: 2013
month: 8
day: 14
title: Fearing the Convenience of Google
---

<p>I hate to use the term 'fan-boy', but I do get a bit Google-engrossed sometimes.</p>

<p>Like the Apple obsessives I see daily on many social networks, I often find myself going wildly out of my way to use new Google services and almost force myself to rely on them in many different aspects of my life. Last week saw Google Music All Access's UK launch, and I instantly paused Spotify and began playing around with the shiny new service - and this was nothing to do with the fact that it is 20% cheaper than Spotify Premium or its 1 month free trial. Within a day, my playlists were copied over and the Spotify app shortcut was removed from my OS X dock and my Android homescreens. Even comparatively mundane points, such as the inclusion of an equaliser in the Android app, were included in my arguments with friends on the matter.</p>

<p>As many people do, I use GMail, Hangouts, Chrome, Google Calendar, Google Drive, YouTube, Google Plus, Analytics, etc. (and, though this often ironically gets taken for granted, their search engine) on daily bases as my primary products in their respective fields, and, also as many people do, I love their integration with each other, my Android devices, and the web in general. This last point is the key here - I almost feel <i>at home</i> and 'safe' when I'm using a Google service.</p>

<p>Without thinking, you can quickly get to the stage where you are nearly wholly reliant on these services for your day-to-day work, social, and personal lives - but, why not? They are the best out there; they're reliable, they're 'free', fast, up-to-date, and they're <i>familiar</i>. Even most iOS users I know use GMail and Google Maps in preference to their Apple equivalents, and as Google's user base grows they are able to collect more data on their customer's web usage habits, search history, and much more. The result of this to the customer is that the services become more intuitive, more useful, and more features get implemented.</p>

<p>So, what's the problem? Well, there isn't one, yet, and I can't really see one coming - It's mainly the <i>fear</i> of the problem that is the problem.</p>

<p>You don't have to look far to find horror stories in which people suddenly and inexplicably (they claim) lose access to their Google account. Immediately, they lose their email with several years' worth of history, invoices, important information, insurance documents, 'evidence', etc. They lose access to their calendars and schedules, the documents they've synced in Google Drive, holiday photos, music, books, the ability to download apps to their Android device. The list goes on, and includes the now-seemingly trivial aspects such as contact syncing and Chrome bookmarks, which on their own would be a pretty substantial loss.</p>

<p>Happily, this doesn't happen very often and most victims seem to regain their accounts eventually, but only after a pretty intense period of disconnection in their lives. However, even the demise of iGoogle and, more recently (and to much more of an uproar), Google Reader, seemed to cause big problems for a lot of people. One of the contributors to the fear, in this respect, is Google's lack of communication with 'standard' (non-paying) customers, and indeed many people complain about this as one of Google's shortcomings. However, when one considers the daily traffic to Google and its services, it'd have to be one of the largest customer services departments in the <i>world</i> to handle everyone's problems - not feasible for a company which focuses on innovation and creation.</p> 


<p>Another 'fear', though one which is secondary for me (and which undoubtedly bothers far fewer people in general), is Google's position when it comes to your data.</p>

<p>Whilst Google, along with other tech giants (such as Facebook, Apple, and Microsoft), is pretty good at being transparent when it comes to things like government requests for customer data and for DMCA takedowns, there are also concerns from some people about data 'back doors' allowing organisations access to their data at will. In addition, articles flare up all over the web as soon as any information arises that could affect people's data (including the reaction to the <a href="http://www.theverge.com/2013/8/14/4621474/yes-gmail-users-have-an-expectation-of-privacy" target="_blank" >wrongly-reported</a> "customers should have no expectation of privacy" story), which just shows how much people do want their information <i>that they freely give to large organisations</i> to be kept private. </p>

<p>People were angry when they discovered that Google reads emails to target adverts at its customers, even though pretty much the exact same process occurs to detect if the email is spam. At the end of the day, the data is 'private' enough that those who you'd really be bothered about reading the information you write would never actually be given the chance to read it. The fact that many of those who <i>do</i> complain often don't really do any more about it, and then continue to use the services as they were anyway, suggests that they either don't really care that much about it and/or they feel they can't conveniently live without the services anyway.</p>

<p>This brings us back round to the first point. How <i>would</i> you live without these services? Well, if you suffer from either of the fears, then there are certainly options. However, most of the time, these are a hassle to set up, are unreliable (and probably actually more vulnerable to attack), and are not really in reach of the every-day Internet user. <i>How</i> you do it depends on how strongly you feel about losing your data or who has control of it.</p>

<p>Several organisations exist to help people in reducing their online observable data footprint (including <a href="https://duckduckgo.com/" target="_blank">Duck Duck Go</a>, secure calendar and scheduler applications, and the use of <a href="http://www.gnupg.org/" target="_blank">GnuPG</a> for email) - all of which are easy enough for many people to find, set up, and use. These kinds of services are useful if you feel more strongly about your privacy (like Richard Stallman, who is famous for his strong views regarding the use of services which place the control of his information out of his hands) and would prefer to prioritise data privacy over convenience.</p>

<p>If using many services is too fragmented and you feel that having to login to many different places is a hassle, then you could consider hosting services yourself. Applications such as <a href="https://www.cozycloud.cc" target="_blank">Cozy Cloud</a> and <a href="http://owncloud.org/" target="_blank">Own Cloud</a> allow you to host your own versions of these services (mail, contacts, calendar, photos, to-do lists, and so on) wherever you want and in one place. If you're super keen on privacy, you could set up a machine in a trusted location and host services on that, but it's just as easy (and possibly more reliable) to get a VPS instead.</p>


<p>All of this is at a cost to convenience, however. These products are designed to cater for day-to-day tasks, and people don't generally have time to configure websites and services all over the web or maintain hardware for their personal mail server or keep their VPS software up-to-date. People <i>need</i> services that are expected to work, services that <i>aren't</i> taken down when the small company they entrusted their data to encounters financial difficulties, and services that <i>don't</i> reject important emails if the mail server trips up for a few hours. The ability to synchronise contacts, mail and photos from and between all of your mobile devices with a single sign-in is so essential for every-day users and technology-enthusiasts alike, and are usually taken completely for granted. </p>

<p>Relying on each independent piece of the resultant online jigsaw and living with the fear that any part could fail silently at any time is severely outweighed by the familiar structure, robustness, and reliability of having it all working together in one place and having it maintained by an organisation that knows what it's doing. Sure, I certainly fear the idea of suddenly losing access to the account (accidentally, or otherwise), and I would definitely suffer if anything did happen to it (as it's essentially a collection of tools for my online and mobile life), but sacrificing the comfort, convenience and habits associated with Google for safety and/or privacy is not feasible for me at the moment. However, I hope that putting this into perspective will make me more prepared for and embrace independent services more as they emerge on the web.</p>